Using strict mode in development and baseline in deployment (#9732)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/best-practices/using-strict-and-baseline-static-analysis.md

---

> title: "Using strict mode in development and baseline in deployment"

Reviewer: I think it's important to have both `strict` and `baseline` somewhere in the descriptions in this frontmatter, but for search optimization and user awareness I would reframe the title and sidebar around Static Analysis rather than the specific settings. Something like "Optimize static analysis for development and deployment" because that's what we're ultimately guiding them through. Then let whatever title you come up with form the basis for `id` and `sidebar_label` and use the `description` and `hoverSnippet` fields to include strict and baseline

id: "using-strict-and-baseline-static-analysis"
description: "Recommend strict static analysis in development and baseline in deployment with the dbt Fusion engine."
sidebar_label: "Strict in development, baseline in deployment"
displayText: Using strict mode in development and baseline in deployment
hoverSnippet: Use strict static analysis while you develop, and baseline in deployment for faster jobs.
---

import FusionLifecycle from '/snippets/_fusion-lifecycle-callout.md';

<FusionLifecycle />

<IntroText>

> Use `strict` static analysis while you develop so the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> validates SQL as thoroughly as possible. Use `baseline` (the default, lighter static analysis mode) in deployment so jobs stay faster and are less likely to stop on analysis findings.

Reviewer: Same feedback as above, rather than putting `static` and `baseline` front-and-center, I would reframe the intro around `static analysis`, why it's important, and how the guide will walk the user through configuration best practices for development and deployment environments. Definitely still mention both settings, but put analysis in the spotlight, if that makes sense

</IntroText>

> This pattern is valid and recommended for projects that use the <Constant name="fusion_engine" />. For more information about modes and features, refer to [About static analysis](/docs/build/about-static-analysis).

Reviewer: Ignoring the intro text, this is the first thing the user will read, their foray into the best practices. I would sprinkle a little more lead it, if anything what the goal of the doc is

"This guide will outline why this pattern (and include what "the pattern" is) is valid and how to configure it in your Fusion project..." or something along those lines

## Why this pattern

> - **Development:** `strict` gives you the strongest SQL checks before you promote changes, including richer column-level features in the VS Code extension.

Reviewer: Might want to add one more sentence about why this is important
```suggestion
- **Development:** `strict` mode has the strongest SQL checks before you promote changes, including richer column-level features in the VS Code extension.
```

> - **Deployment:** `baseline` skips remote warehouse schema downloads and surfaces findings as warnings, so jobs are less likely to block.

Reviewer: Same as above, an additional sententce about why this behavior is important would be helpful. Does it save time, money, something else?

`strict` can increase compile time, especially in projects with many sources, because the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> downloads schemas for all sources (including sources your models do not reference). Teams with thousands of sources have seen large compile-time differences between `baseline` and `strict`.

## Set the mode with the CLI flag

Use the [`--static-analysis`](/reference/global-configs/static-analysis-flag) flag to set the mode for a single run:

> ```bash

Reviewer: For generic code implementations like this that don't contain any project-specific parts, it's a good idea to place them in individual code blocks without any notes so that users can copy and paste directly from the docs

For example:

**Development:**
```bash
dbt compile --static-analysis strict
```

**Deployment:**
```bash
dbt compile --static-analysis baseline
```

```

You can use the same flag with `dbt run` or `dbt build`. If you already have <Constant name="core" /> or the platform CLI installed alongside <Constant name="fusion" />, use `dbtf` as the unambiguous <Constant name="fusion" /> command.

## Set the mode with an environment variable

You can also drive [`static_analysis`](/reference/resource-configs/static-analysis) from a custom environment variable in `dbt_project.yml`. This is useful when development and deployment share the same project config but set different environment values.

<File name="dbt_project.yml">

```yml
models:
  my_project:
    +static_analysis: "{{ env_var('DBT_ENV_STATIC_ANALYSIS', 'baseline') }}"
```

</File>

Then set the variable per environment:

- Development: `DBT_ENV_STATIC_ANALYSIS=strict`
- Deployment: leave unset (defaults to `baseline`), or set `DBT_ENV_STATIC_ANALYSIS=baseline`

`DBT_ENV_STATIC_ANALYSIS` is a custom variable name you choose. It is separate from the built-in `DBT_STATIC_ANALYSIS` override used with the CLI flag.

For more information about `env_var`, refer to [About env_var](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/env_var) and [Environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables).

> ## Tradeoffs to keep in mind

Reviewer: I would add a lead-in here so we're not jumping right to bullet points on an H2

> ## Tradeoffs to keep in mind

Reviewer: I'd also add that these aren't neccessarily all "tradeoffs." This section is reiterating some stuff from earlier> I think the first two points should be covered in the openening and the 3rd could be added to the configuration sections, and remove this part entirely
